Chapter nine, diversity of plant life. Last time I covered the history of plant 
systemics and how our approach to defining and categorizing species has changed 
over the years. Today, I'll talk about our current system for defining and 
categorizing plants. There will be a brief tangent when I talk about plant life 
cycles and the alternation of generations. Finally, I'll go over the different 
phi of plants, the traits that we use to identify them, and some examples of 
human uses for them. Okay. Okay. The last lecture, I talked about Charles 
Darwin's theory of evolution by natural selection, and how before his works 
were widely read and accepted, a lot of scientists believed that species were 
fixed and distinct. Let's imagine for a moment that we live in that kind of 
world. Imagine that species are fixed. The species that live today have always 
been here, have always looked the same, will always look the same, and no new 
species will ever appear. Let's also assume that species are distinct, that 
they never interbreed to produce hybrids. In that world, it would be much 
easier to classify species. Since species would never change, we could just 
organize them into bins, and once we were done, we would never need to 
reorganize or invent new categories. However, that's not the kind of world that 
we live in. In our world, species have changed and evolved gradually over 
generations. Modern species are descended from prehistoric species that are now 
extinct. Modern species share common ancestors and new species can appear as a 
result of interbreeding or divergent evolution. So any attempt to classify 
species into categories is going to be at least somewhat artificial. 
Classification systems are still very helpful, but they are always imperfect 
systems that are subject to change as new information becomes available. Modern 
classification systems attempt to mimic evolutionary history, but If we wanted 
to more accurately represent evolutionary history, these clotograms would look 
more like this one. This figure is much harder to read and interpret than the 
figures you'll typically see in my lectures and in the textbook. But this does 
more accurately represent what probably happened. Each node of this tree 
represents a common ancestor whose descendants diverged. They evolved different 
traits to the points that they became different species, and those new species 
were then the common ancestor of other new species. This cladogram is of green 
algae. Green algae are protists. They are not plants, but they do have 
chlorophyll and perform photosynthesis. Here on the left, Chlorophyta and kofta 
are different clods or categories of green algae. They represent divergent 
evolution from a common ancestor. More recent species of green algae are 
categorized based on which of these species they descended from. Clodograms 
like this one change as new information becomes available. Even when using DNA 
evidence to try to identify closely related species, we may still need to re 
evaluate when exactly species diverged and which ones are the most closely 
related. Now look at this branch at the bottom. This embryophyta is the entire 
plant kingdom. On this figure, it looks like just another claw, just another 
branch. But the first embryophyte represented down here. The first ever 
embryophyte is the common ancestor for all of our modern plants. So 
classification is highly debated both because new evidence changes or 
understanding of evolutionary history, and all categorization systems are 
subject to change and revision. This top figure up here shows the five kingdom 
system. This was developed in 1969 by Robert Whitaker. The five kingdoms are 
Monera for prokaryotic bacteria, protista for eukaryotes that don't fit into 
the other kingdoms, plants, fungi and animals. Cells, you may recall can be 
prokaryotic or eukaryotic. Prokaryotic cells do not have membrane bound 
organeles. They do not have mitochondria or plastids, and they do not have a 
nuclear membrane around their DNA. Karyotic cells do contain membrane bound 
organes. Single celled organisms can be prokaryotic or eukaryotic. All 
multicellular organisms are eukaryotic. So, in 1969, we have one kingdom for 
all prokaryotes with eukaryotes divided into four different kingdoms. But then 
in the 1970s and 80s, we learned that prokaryotic species are much more diverse 
than we originally thought. We also realized that protista as a miscellaneous 
grab bag category doesn't make sense from an evolutionary perspective. Again, 
protists are eukaryotes that don't fit into the plants fungi or animal 
kingdoms. So, in 1990, Karl Wosi at the University of Illinois Arbana Champagne 
proposed the three Domain system. Two domains, Arka and bacteria are 
prokaryotic, and all eukaryotes are in domain Eukarya. As of 2024, the three 
domain system is still what we use today. And among all the accolades that Wos 
received for his work, there's a research building at the UIUC campus named in 
his honor. Domain bacteria contains all species of bacteria you are likely to 
be familiar with. Archaea are found in environments with extreme temperature, 
salinity, or other conditions normally inhospitable for life. Both bacteria and 
archaea are prokaryotes, which means they are single celled and do not have 
membrane bound organeles. Eukarya contains all eukaryotes. Eukaryotic cells 
have membrane bound organals and eukaryotic organisms can be both single celled 
or multicellular. Protista is no longer an official kingdom, but we still use 
the term protist to refer to eukaryotes that do not fit into the remaining 
kingdoms. Protists are very diverse. Some protists like algae are autotrophic, 
which means they get their energy and nutrition from non living sources like 
the sun. Other protysts are heterotrophic, which means they need to consume 
other organisms for energy and nutrition. Plants are autotrophic. All plants 
carry out photosynthesis to capture solar energy and store it as chemical 
energy. Animals and fungi are both heterotrophs. They get energy and nutrition 
from other organisms. Fungi are absorptive heterotrophes. They grow on organic 
matter like plants, or they infect animals and they secrete enzymes to break 
down organic matter so they can absorb the nutrients. Animals are ingestive 
heterotrophes. They eat or ingest plants, fungi or other animals and digest 
them to absorb the nutrients. This difference, autotrophic versus heterotrophic 
is what sets plants apart from animals and from fungi. Animals and fungi get 
energy by consuming or decomposing other living things while plants get energy 
from a non living source, the sun. Kingdom plant or land plants are also called 
embryophytes. Embryophytes, you may recall from the more complex cladogram are 
closely related with green algae protists. What makes embryophytes different 
from protists is the retention of an embryo. During plant sexual reproduction, 
a female gamete or egg cell is fertilized internally by a male gamete or sperm 
cell. Fertilization, the fusion of the two gamete cells happens inside of the 
parent plant as opposed to outside of the parents. Also, after fertilization, 
the ensuing zygote is retained inside the parent plant as the zygote develops 
into a mult cellular embryo. Internal fertilization, along with retention of 
the embryo is the trait that we have used to define embryophytes. This is the 
line that we artificially used to separate land plants from protosts like green 
algae. Using this definition, we would say that the earliest embryophytes, the 
first land plants, appeared about 470 million years ago. Okay. Now, before I 
talk about the different groups of plants within the plant kingdom. I'm going 
to summarize the plant life cycle. I mentioned last time that plants experience 
both a haploid and a diploid phase in their life cycle. Some of the terms I use 
will sound new to you if you have only studied animal reproduction. Before I 
get into that, let's review two types of cell division. Mitosis and meiosis. 
You can find more detailed summaries of mitosis and meiosis respectively in 
Chapters two and five of your book. Mitosis happens as part of the cell cycle 
during plant growth. It can also happen after a plant is wounded in order to 
replace the missing tissue. During mitosis, all the DNA in the initial mother 
cell is replicated, and then the cell divides once into two daughter cells. 
These two daughter cells are identical. They contain the same amount of DNA and 
their DNA is an exact copy of each other's. Again, this happens in parts of the 
plants that are growing. Miosis only happens for the purpose of reproduction. 
Like mitosis, meiosis begins with DNA replication, but then has two rams of 
cell division, producing a total of four daughter cells. Each of these daughter 
cells contain only half the amount of DNA that the initial mother cell had. We 
would say that the mother cell is diploid, and then the final daughter cells 
are haploid, containing half the amount of DNA. Okay. Also, each of these four 
daughter cells are unique because of events called crossing over and 
independent assortment. I'm not going to go into the details of meiosis in this 
class. The important things to understand here are that the products of meiosis 
contain half as much DNA as the parent cell and that each of these products are 
genetically different from each other. This is different from mitosis where the 
amount of genetic material remains the same, and the two daughter cells are 
identical. Again, meiosis only happens for reproduction. Gametes, that is egg 
and sperm cells have half the normal amount of genetic material. So when two 
gametes fuse during fertilization, the resulting zygotes will have the normal 
amount of genetic material. It will receive half of its genes from the female 
gametes and half from the male gametes. Also, since each daughter cell from 
meiosis is genetically different, that means each gamete will be genetically 
different. And that in turn means that each zygote will be genetically 
different even if multiple zygotes came from the same two parents. The life 
cycle of all plants involves alternation of generations. All plants have a 
diploid sporophyte generation and a haploid gametophyte generation. The 
dividing line between these two generations are meiosis and fertilization. 
Diploid and haploid, refer to the amount of genetic material that the cells 
contain. Remember that during meiosis, the amount of genetic material is cut in 
half. The parent cell is diploid, and the cells produced from meiosis are 
haploid. In animals, these haploid cells develop into gamates almost 
immediately. In plants, the cells produced from meiosis develop first into 
spores. Since these spores are haploid, they are the beginning of the 
gametophyte generation. Depending on species, gametophytes might produce both 
male and female gametes, or a species may have two different types of 
gametophyte with one that only produces sperm and one that only produces eggs. 
Also, depending on the species, the gametophyte could be the dominant phase of 
the life cycle. This could be the stage of the plant that grows, lives longer, 
and is more likely to be noticed if you see it in the wild. What all 
gametophytes from all plant species have in common is that they are haploid. 
They develop from spores, they contain half as much genetic material as the 
sporophyte, and gametophytes eventually produce gametes. Since the gmetophyte 
is already haploid, it can produce gametes by mitosis. Recall that during 
mitosis, the amount of genetic material remains the same. So if you start with 
a haploid cell, you will get a haploid product. All plant species have two 
kinds of gametes, sperm cells and egg cells, and when a sperm cell fuses with 
an egg cell that is called fertilization. During fertilization, two haploid 
cells fuse together to produce a diploid zygote. Since the zygote is diploid, 
it is the beginning of the sporophyte generation. The haploid generation begins 
with meiosis, which cuts the amount of genetic material in half. Unlike 
animals, plant meiosis produces spores to begin the gametophyte generation. 
Eventually, the gametophyte will produce gametes by mitosis. Fertilization, the 
fusion of gametes creates a yo with twice as much genetic material as a single 
gamete, it is the beginning of the sporophyte generation. And eventually, the 
sporangia, a specific organ within the sporophytes. The sporangium will carry 
out meiosis to produce a new batch of spores to produce a new generation of 
metophytes. Now, before I move on. Those of you enrolled in the lab section 
should stop here for now until you finish the lab activity for week one. Part 
of that activity will involve using your best guess to categorize different 
species of plants. You will not be graded for accuracy on that part of the 
assignment. So I would like you to try it before I give away the answer in the 
next part of this lecture. So pause now and welcome back. So with that, let's 
look at different groups of plants within the plants kingdom. Starting at the 
bottom, plants are descended from a prehistoric protist like green algae. The 
trait that we have artificially declared as the line between algae and plants 
is the retention of the embryo inside of the parent plants. From there, plants 
are divided into liver boards, mosses, horn boards, club mosses, whisk ferns, 
horsetails, true ferns, cycads, Ginko, tophytes conifers and flowering plants. 
You can also see additional traits that we use to distinguish one group from 
another. While we want these groups to reflect evolutionary history as much as 
possible, there are still some traits that we can use as helpful dividing lines 
between these groups. A few that I want to draw your attention to are vascular 
tissue. Liver warts, mosses, and hornworts are non vascular plants, while all 
other plants have vascular tissue with true stems. Club mosses, whisk ferns, 
horsetails and true ferns are called seedless vascular plants because they have 
vascular tissue, but they do not develop seeds. Cycads, ginko, netaphytes and 
conifers are all called gymnosperms or naked seed plants. Flowering plants are 
called angiosperms or enclosed seed plants because their seeds develop inside 
of a structure like a flower. So beginning with non vascular plants. In total, 
there are about 25,000 species of non vascular plants that includes all species 
of liver barts, mosses, and hornworts. As the title non vascular suggests they 
do not have vascular tissue like Zylm or flum. Xylem and flum are specialized 
cells that direct the flow of water fluids and dissolve substances like sugar 
throughout the plants in the roots, stems, and branches. So no vascular tissue 
means that transport through a non vascular plants is much less efficient. 
Imagine if you did not have a circulatory system for rapidly transporting 
oxygen or nutrients throughout your body and think of all the problems that 
would create. Since non vascular plants cannot transport water or sugar very 
efficiently. They do not grow very large. They are generally restricted to 
moist environments and will spread over a wide area so that all parts of the 
plants are exposed to water in their environment. They do not have much 
internal structure. If you've ever scraped moss off a rock, you likely noticed 
that it forms a thin mat over the surface. Non vascular plants do not have true 
leaves, since leaves have vascular tissue. They do not produce seeds. Since 
they grow in moist environments, they rely on water to distribute gametes and 
spores. Finally, unlike all other types of plants, non vascular plants have a 
dominant gmtophyte generation. If you've ever seen a moss, liverwort, or 
hornwort in the wild, you almost certainly saw the gmtophyte. The gametophyte 
organism is larger, it lives longer. In all non vascular species, the 
sporophyte is very small and is completely dependent on its gmtophyte parents. 
Shown here are liver boards. Liver warts may superficially resemble some molds 
or lichens, but they are plants and they do carry out photosynthesis. Liver 
warts are sometimes described as leafy. But again, keep in mind that true 
leaves would have vastar tissue, so liver borts don't really have leaves. These 
are surfaces for carrying out photosynthesis that do contain chlorophyll, so 
they do serve the same purpose. Now, one thing that is unique about liverworts 
is that they are missing something called guard cells. All plants, including 
liverworts have small pores called stomata. Stomata allow carbon dioxide to 
enter the plant for carrying out photosynthesis. But stomata can also allow 
water to escape, since the inside of a plant is much more humid than the 
surrounding air. Gard cells allow a plant to open or close their stomata so 
they can regulate the movement of carbon dioxide and water. For example, when 
the plant is performing photosynthesis, the stomata will open to allow carbon 
dioxide inside. When the plant is not performing photosynthesis, it will close 
the stomata to keep water inside. Since liverworts do not have guard cells, 
their stomata are always open. So if their environment dries out, the water 
will escape and the plant will dry out very quickly. Fortunately, liverworts 
don't need to worry about drying out as long as they only grow in moist humid 
habitats. Horn warts are a much smaller group of plants. I'd like to draw your 
attention to the sporophyte of the hornworts. Horn warts have a dominant 
gmtophyte phase. The gmetopyte is the larger organism that lives longer. But in 
this picture, you see these grass like or horn like growths that give the 
hornwort its name. These growths are the sporophytes. If you look down at these 
pictures, you can see that these growth, the sporophytes are growing from a mat 
at or underneath the surface. So this mat down here is the gametophytes. Again, 
in all non vascular plants, the sporophytes will grow while attached to its 
parent gmtophytes. Now, these are still considered separate organisms because 
they are genetically distinct. The sporophyte contains twice as much genetic 
material as the haploid gmtophytes. But despite being separate organisms, the 
sporophyte will still spend its entire short life attached to its parents, 
while while it develops a new generation of spores to distribute and start a 
new generation of metophtes. Okay. Now finally, we get to mosses. Mosses are 
the largest group of non vascular plants. Mosses are further divided into peat 
mosses, true mosses and rock mosses. All have dominant gmtophte phases and all 
grow in moist environments. Unlike other non vascular plants, though, mosses do 
have some leaf like and root like structures. But since they still don't really 
have specialized vascular tissue, we still would not say that they have true 
leaves or roots. While non vascular plants are small, they play an essential 
role in ecosystems. Once mosses or other non vascular plants spread into a 
suitable habitat, they can grow and spread very quickly from there. As 
autotrophs, non vascular plants can be the foundation of a new ecosystem. Non 
vascular plants are an example of a pioneer species, since they can spread into 
a once barren habitat and enable other species like animals to spread after 
them. Non vascular plants will acquire and concentrate water and nutrients 
within their bodies, their structure. That makes them a good source of food for 
animals or other heterotropes that rely on something like a plant to acquire 
and retain water and nutrients like that. Also, by retaining water, non 
vascular plants are able to prevent erosion by reducing surface runoff. There 
are some human uses for non vascular plants in particular peat moss. Peat moss 
is a type of moss that grows in highly acidic bodies of water. The acidity 
prevents other types of plants from growing in those bodies of water. So the 
peat mosses are well preserved over a long period of time, and they can build 
up within those acidic ponds or bogs. The resulting substance is very similar 
to fossil fuels like coal. It has not been subjected to the same high pressure 
conditions over a long period of time that make true fossil fuels, but it can 
still be burned as a fuel. Peat moss is also used as a soil additive since it 
helps the soil to absorb and retain moisture if you want to prevent a plant 
from drying out. Okay. All other types of plants have vascular tissues. Plants 
have two types of vascular tissues, Xylem and flum. Xylem transports water and 
dissolved nutrients from the roots up through the stem and into the leaves. 
Xylem only flows in one direction. Flom are bidirectional. They can transport 
sugars and other biomolecules all over the plants. For example, floum may 
transport sugar from the leaves down to storage organs in the roots, later on, 
Flum may transport those molecules up from the roots and into parts of the 
plant that are actively growing and need those resources. Vascular tissue all 
in all makes transport much more efficient, so the plants can grow taller and 
can survive in drier habitats. According to the fossil record, the first 
vascular plants appeared around 420 million years ago, about 50 million years 
after the first ever land plants. So the evolution of vascular tissue would 
have made plants more fit, more capable of surviving in a wider variety of land 
habitats. Having vascular tissue means that these plants can have true roots, 
stems, and leaves with veins. Also, A vascular plants in all vascular plants, 
the diploid sporophyte generation is dominant. This is true of seedless 
vascular plants, gymnosperms and angiosperms. The two phyla of seedless 
vascular plants that I'll highlight here are lycophyta and pterophyta Lycopta 
includes club mosses and ground pines. Both of those common names are 
misleading. Club mosses do superficially resemble moss because despite being 
vascular plants, they still lack true leaves. But club mosses have stems and 
roots with vascular tissues, so they are very different from true non vascular 
mosses. Also, ground pines again, do superficially resemble conifer trees. They 
look like, very small pines with very skinny trunks. But again, these are 
seedless plants, so they aren't true gymnoseperms and are not related to pine 
trees. Okay. Moving on to terafta This is a much larger phylum that includes 
horsetails, whisk ferns and true ferns. Beginning with horsetails, horsetails 
also, sorry, horsetails do have leaves, but the leaves do not have chlorophyll. 
They do have leaves, but the leaves don't have chlorophyll. Instead, 
photosynthesis happens in the green parts of these stems. Horsetail stems also 
contain a substance called silica. This makes the stems very rigid and coarse. 
In the time of pioneers in North America, these plants were sometimes called 
scouring rushes because the silica in the stems made these plants useful as 
scouring pads for cleaning pots and pans. Both lycophyta and pterophyta used to 
include very large species of plants that are now extinct. Again, remember that 
plants like these were the very first vascular plants to appear on Earth. And 
therefore, the first plants that could survive in habitats farther away from 
fresh water, and the first plant species that could efficiently transport water 
through very large bodies. So they were able to grow taller than non vascular 
plants. So there would have been horsetails or lycophytes growing as tall as 
trees. Today, the plant matter from those forest has been buried deep 
underground, and after being subjected to high pressure and heat over a long 
period of time, those prehistoric lycophyta and terafta forests are now the 
fossil fuels like coal and oil that we use today. Also within terafta are whisk 
ferns. Wisk ferns are similar to horsetails and that they do not have leaves 
with chlorophyll. They do have leaf like growths, but they do not have 
chlorophyll in their leaves, they instead carry out photosynthesis in their 
stems. These yellow growths at the top of the whisk fern are the sporangia. A 
sport All plants in the sporophyte generation have sporangia for producing 
spores. These are just more visible than an other species. Again, this is where 
meiosis happens to produce the haploid spores. The largest group of seedless 
vascular plants are the true ferns. True ferns have these distinct leafy frons. 
If you've kept a fern as a house plant, you may have felt small brown grains 
underneath the frons. That is not a disease or a parasite of any kind. Those 
small grains under the frons are the sporangia. Again, that is where spores are 
produced. So if your fern has those, then it is a healthy plant. Like other 
plants within teraftaFerns once grew very tall, tall enough to dominate 
forests. Modern species of ferns are much smaller, but some can still grow very 
big. For humans, ferns can be a source of fiber. The larger ones can produce 
very sturdy fibers from their fronds. Some ferns can also be a source of food. 
More commonly though, they are used for decoration or as a natural method of 
air filtration inside of a building. Okay. All the remaining groups of plants 
are the seed plants. All seedless plants mentioned previously rely heavily on 
water for reproduction for distributing and nourishing developing plants. For 
seed plants, the seed has a protective outer coat surrounding the embryo and 
storing nutrients inside. This can sustain the young plant while it develops 
and make it possible for seed plants to grow in even drier environments than 
before. All seed plants are vascular plants with true roots, stems and leaves. 
Sed plants include gymnosperms or naked seed plants, as well as angiosperms or 
flowering plants. Gymnosperms are called naked seed plants because their seeds 
develop on exposed surfaces like the underside of pine cone scales. While 
angiosperm seeds develop inside of a flower or are often enclosed inside of a 
fruit. Gymnosperms do not have flowers or fruits. Shown here is a seed cone. 
You can see the seeds developing underneath the scales. Gymnosperms will have 
separate cones for developing seeds and pollen. The pollen cones tend to be 
much smaller and sometimes fleshier than the more typical looking seed cones. 
There are four phyla of gymnosperms. The first and most prominent pym is the 
conifer tree pym Conifer trees all have true leaves with chlorophyil. Their 
leaves tend to be needle or scale shaped and often have a waxy texture. All of 
this helps the leaf retain water. The waxy surface helps seal water in and 
their small surface area reduces the amount of water that evaporates out of the 
leaf. Cones are the reproductive structures for conifers. So they will have 
small male cones that produce pollen and larger female cones that produce 
seeds. It often takes multiple growing seasons for conifers to develop seeds. 
So during the first growing season, a seed cone will be open. There will be 
space between its scales so that wind distributed pollen can enter. Then the 
female cone closes once pollen arrives and the scales are pressed together. 
During this time, the sperm cells from the pollen grains are fertilizing the 
egg cells from the female cone and the seeds are developing. In some species, 
this process can take well over a year. Then when the seeds are finally mature, 
the female cone will open back up and the wind will distribute the mature 
conifer seeds. We use conifers for a lot of different things. The big one is 
lumber. Conifers are all woody plants. They have large woody trunks that can be 
a source of lumber or fuel. These were used as masks in wooden ships for early 
seafarers. Conifer wood is also used in furniture, match sticks for 
construction or for telephone poles among other things. Conifers also produce a 
substance called resin inside of their trunks. If you cut open the trunk of a 
conifer tree, you would find resin canals running up and down the stem. This 
resin is used to make substances like turpentine or rosin. Conifer wood is also 
a source of wood pulp, which we use to make paper products or cardboard. We 
don't typically think of conifers as a source of food, but some do have edible 
bark or seeds. White pine needles are sometimes brewed in tea, and Juniper 
cones can be fermented to produce gin. These are often called juniper berries, 
but they're actually cones. They're just fleshier instead of scaly. Also, the 
Pacific tree is the source of a chemotherapy drug called Taxol, used to treat 
ovarian cancer. And finally, conifers are often used for decoration. Some 
people like to look at them year round. Or alternatively, in about six months, 
a lot of us are going to start gathering up conifer and conifer like branches 
to decorate our homes and public areas. Conifers are the most prominent phylum 
of gymnosperms. There are three others, cycads, Ginko, and metaphytes. Cycads 
are small leafy tree like plants that grow in tropical habitats. Cycads are 
dioecious. Unlike conifer trees in which the same plants will have both male 
and female cos, a single cycad plant will only have either male or female 
reproductive structures, one or the other, but never both. Like ferns, cycads 
once formed entire forests, while modern species are smaller, they can still be 
pretty big. Larger cycads can be a source of fiber and can be used for 
decorations. But all cycad species produce carcinogenic substances that make 
them unsafe to eat. One interesting thing about cycads is that there is some 
evidence that early cycads were pollinated by insects. Non vascular plants and 
seedless plants rely on water to distribute gametes and spores, while conifers 
rely on wind to distribute pollen and seeds. So if cycads were the first insect 
pollinated plants, that would be a very noteworthy adaptation. Okay. Next is 
the Ginko. The Ginko is the only species in the Phylum Ginko pita that is still 
alive today. Even then, that species does not live in the wild. You will not 
find wild Ginko forests. You will only find it in gardens, parks, or on private 
property, places that are attended by humans. Ginkos have a very unusual leaf 
structure. It resembles angiosperm leaves, but no angiosperm has a leaf 
structure like this one. Ginkos have this very distinct fan shape to their 
leaves. These do change color at the end of the summer like angiosperm leaves, 
but again, this shape is very different from anything you'll see on any other 
tree. Also, unlike most angiosperms, Ginkos are dioses, there are male and 
female trees. Female trees produce seeds within these fleshy fruit fleshy fruit 
like structures. Since these don't come from flowers, they aren't really 
fruits. Also, they have a very ramcid odor. Despite the odor, the actual seeds 
inside, sometimes called ginko nuts are considered a delicacy in some parts of 
the world. The last group of gymnosperms are the tophytes. This is a very small 
group of plants with only 70 species alive today. Netophytes share a lot of 
traits with angiosperms. They have more advanced vascular tissue, more like 
angiosperms than other gymnosperms. They also sometimes have flower like 
structures. One species within netaphta is the joint fur. The joint fur grows 
in North America, in the deserts to the Southwest, and it is the source of 
ephedrine, which is used as a stimulant in some medicines. Last, but certainly 
not least are the flowering plants or angiosperms. All flowering plants are in 
the phylum magnoliopta. This is a very large phylum with over 250,000 species 
alive today. These are the most widespread plants on Earth. They are far and 
away the economically important to humans. So again, Magnoliapta includes all 
flowering plants. So A flower that you use for decoration or any other purpose 
is an angiosperm. Flowers are the source of fruit. So all fruits come from 
angiosperms. And Magnoliafta also includes many species of woody trees like 
oak, maple, and ash. And I mentioned fruits earlier, Angiosperms are also the 
source of all nuts and grains as well. So these are highly economically 
important plants and rather than stuff them all into the last 5 minutes, I'm 
going to spend most of the rest of the class talking about them. So in summary, 
we currently organize all life on Earth into three domains. Bacteria, Archaea, 
and uk, Bacteria, Archaea, and Eukarya. The plants kingdom is part of domain 
Eucharia. Plants are also known as embryophytes. So named because they retain 
the embryo inside the parent plant during reproduction. All plants demonstrates 
alternation of generations with a haploid gmtophyte phase and a diploid 
sporophyte phase. Non vascular plants include mosses, liverworts, and horn 
parts. They are small and confined to moist environments and are the only group 
of plants with a dominant gamtopyte phase. All vascular plants have a dominant 
sporophyte phase. Ferns, horsetails, club mosses, and whisk ferns are seedless 
vascular plants, able to grow taller and further away from freshwater, but they 
do still rely on water to distribute gametes and spores. Since their embryos 
lack the protective outer covering of a seed coat. Gymnosperms are seed plants 
that include conifers, cycads, ginkos and tophytes. Conifers are the most 
economically important of these groups, but far and away the most economically 
important type of plants are angiosperms, the flowering plants, and we will 
take a closer look at those next week. 
